          

Noah Chapman

HIST 5706

Shawn Graham

12/9/21

**Digitizing the Roman Urban Experience: A Proposal**

 While much has been done to understand Roman social life at the highest levels, an often overlooked facet of Roman studies has long been the day-to-day urban experience of the lower-class Roman. As pointed out by Jeremy Hartnett in his book _The Roman Street: Urban Life and Society in Pompeii, Herculaneum, and Rome_ (Cambridge, 2017), the Roman street serves a core function in the urban tapestry, serving more than a means to travel from point to point, but are rather an often loosely regulated network of social interaction, often separated from traditional notions of Roman class and social position. Even the more “regulated” spaces are typically overlooked for their function as bastions of communal values and experience. Using examples from scholarship and interactive media, this paper will suggest that a reconstruction of an Imagined Space through the lens of the urban Roman provides ample opportunity for growing a deeper understanding of Roman social life, as well as opportunities for unique storytelling. It will also provide a blueprint for how this could be accomplished, supplementing the experimental visual novel produced by Noah Chapman.

 The social life of the Roman lower classes has been somewhat distorted by the fact that very few sources on the common Roman are extant, with most surviving sources being produced by the upper class. These elite sources show a tendency towards disinterest or even disdain towards the activities of the urban commons. A similar situation exists for rural Romans, however it could be argued that the surviving material on agriculture, natural history, and greater contiguity in day-to-day rural life through later history can provide a clearer picture of rural life within Roman territories. This cannot be said for urban life, and while the more formal spaces of home, theatre, and temple are fairly well-understood, the liminal spaces of the urban experience have remained under-investigated. Roman streets were often crowded, smelly, and noisy places, and unlike the earlier conceptions of the Roman streets being relatively empty (Hartnett 2017, 46), it is fair to say that the average urban Roman would have had ample opportunity to engage with broader society. The streets of Rome and her colonies were populated with shops, bakeries, the occasional performance, and more carnal activities. It is also important to note that most city-dwellers did not have a place to prepare food within their residence, meaning that the average urban Roman would have been obligated to go out in the street to eat at the many _thermopolia_ and bakeries present throughout their city. While out on the streets, they would have had ample opportunity to engage with the community and with the politics and issues of the day. 

While the Roman elite had their Forums and Curia in which to discuss politics, the urban street and the practice of the _circulus_ was the political theatre of the common man. Informal gatherings of men, the _circulus_, are an attested phenomenon in Roman sources, although are often looked down on by their elite writers as uncouth and unintellectual (Hartnett 2017, 51). In Pompeii the walls are covered with political messaging, displays of support from common people to their favored candidates, often their patrons or friends. The “soft power” of the urban commoner should not be ignored, with even slaves and freedmen finding a measure of influence within their neighbourhoods through their participation in district administration as _magistri_ and _administri_, including assisting in the payment for public works (Cooley 2014,162). To the colonial Roman, they would have had more immediate contact with these men along with their council of wealthy property owners than the elites of the Roman Senate Even those in Rome would have generally had closer contact with their district administrators. Indeed, this relatively ad hoc system of district management resulted in a lack of regulation or true law on the streets. City-dwellers often had to deal with congestion, overcrowding from storefronts, poorly governed animals, and especially at night, criminals. Not even the wealthy were entirely safe from being shaken down.

A question presents itself: how to distill these elements of Roman social life into an interactive experience while still retaining elements of gameplay and fun? Afterall, most historical video games take place in distinctly turbulent times, often featuring characters who are well-equipped to deal with these times. Warfare and grand political maneuvers are often prioritized. Certainly, a hypothetical “Roman Colonial Life Simulator” could be possible, even more academically acceptable. However, opportunities for introducing creative storytelling are still present. For this, a few games can be noted, but a major point of focus should be placed on the 2019 game _Pathologic 2_, a remake of the 2005 game by Russian Developer Ice-pick Lodge. Set in a fictionalized town loosely based on Pre-Revolution Russia, the game casts the player as a local Doctor, Artemy Burakh, who is tasked with discovering a cure for the plague ravaging the town. Burakh must accomplish this while surviving in an unforgiving environment, managing a series of health bars through use of scavenged food, water, and healing items. The player must also manage the health of a series of non-player characters, referred to as the “Bound”, who may also catch the plague. The game is set on a rigid day-night cycle, with the plague roving between districts every day, threatening the player’s Bound and their own health. Looters abound in these districts, forcing the player to sneak around them or fight, which is difficult and dangerous to the player. Quests are managed on a “mind map”, defining the web of connections between plot threads and characters, as well as assisting with the navigation of the city. 

While the narrative and design of _Pathologic 2_ do not present any overtly historical elements, the game itself is rich with historical texture, and places immense emphasis on the player coming to understand the local culture through interaction and dialogue. In order to progress through the narrative, the underlying philosophy of the game must be grasped. The limited time frame of 12 days forces the player to take a proactive role in the experience, learning on the fly. _Pathologic 2_, while not objectively a “fun” game to play, uses the techniques of worldbuilding, challenge, narrative, and suspense to grant the player a rich concept of the culture and themes of its imagined space. While not explicitly set in pre-Revolution Russia, it provides an experience that places the player in the role of an ordinary person living through an extraordinary experience. While some of Pathologic’s design and narrative choices will not fit a game aiming for historical realism, the core design and intent of the game could serve as good examples of a game that uses mechanics and narrative to convey cultural ideas and experiences. Wandering the streets of the Town-upon-Gorkon could easily be translated to wandering the digitally reconstructed streets of Pompeii. Introducing some of _Pathologic_’s survival and horror mechanics also present possibilities. As established, the Roman street was not always the safest place.

What is being proposed is not an traditional educational game, but rather an attempt to recreate and engage with a long-overlooked space within Roman society that emphasizes engagement and comprehension development. As such, a game would require a setting that is both accessible, unextraordinary, and historically engaging. This setting would then be populated with characters and interactions that highlight the day-to-day lives of the urban Roman. Layering on concepts from narrative games like _Pathologic,_ additional challenges can be introduced, including storytelling that introduces a sense of tension to the experience. This leads to the introduction of the experimental game; _Ten Days in August 79_ is a historical role-playing game set in the city of Pompeii, in the Early Imperial Period, immediately prior to the Eruption of Mt. Vesuvius. The player takes the role of a Pompeiian freedman, servant of a city councilor, who, witnessing the destruction of Pompeii in a vision, must try to convince his friends and relatives to leave the city within the limited time frame. The player is given the ability to explore a reconstructed section of the city and interact with the citizens of Pompeii, seeing many different aspects of their day-to-day lives; but also forcing them to confront the sense of horror and helplessness that they, as a member of the lower class, are able to do very little to affect the city’s fate.

Consideration continued in Part 2:

5706_PompeiiVN_Paradata

Works Cited:

Cooley, Alison Elizabeth, and Cooley Melvin George Lowe. _Pompeii and Herculaneum A Sourcebook_. Routledge, 2014.

Hartnett, Jeremy. _Roman Street: Urban Life and Society in Pompeii, Herculaneum, and Rome_. Cambridge University Press, 2020.